hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye I mean if you look at the
predictors of going to college one of
them is having two parents at home
that's one of the strongest predictors
of going on to obtain a bachelor's
degree the other piece is you know when
I think back to the guys I grew up with
and two of them went to prison I had one
friend who was shot College may not have
been the right path for those guys
College isn't the right path for
everyone but I do you think that if they
had been in an environment where there
was more family stability good Role
Models they you know they wouldn't have
been shot to
[Music]
death hello everybody I'm talking today
to Dr Rob Henderson who's a novelist and
a public intellectual a
psychologist and author of the recent
book troubled A Memoir of foster care
family and social class which was
released in February and we really talk
about not so much his book exactly
although also that but Rob's experience
growing up in the foster care system in
the United States in California and what
and his
transformation sequential
transformations of personality and
status as he moved moved from the foster
care system very fragmented um and
chaotic childhood upbringing into the
military and then in and then to Yale
and to Cambridge and so quite a an
upward arc on the academic and
intellectual side and we review his book
The Autobiography that's laid out in
this book talking about his early
experiences and concentrating as well on
his developing ideas of family
fragmentation and the manner in which
that fragmentation has been aided and
deed by the the same Elites essentially
that Rob studied with at Yale and
perhaps to a lesser degree at Cambridge
and so he's the originator of the notion
of luxury beliefs right the idea
that that the elite
classes who are yammering constantly
about privilege have as one of the
Privileges they're unwilling to discuss
the privilege of adopting ideas that are
very very very harmful to dispossessed
people especially those who are
economically dispossessed they have
these ideas of unstable family structure
for example that when implemented in the
real world are absolutely catastrophic
and so we talk about that too uh and so
join us for
that so I just reread your book troubled
A Memoir of foster care family and
social class last week and I found some
topics that I'd really like to zero in
on but the first thing I'd like to know
is how is when exactly was your book
published and how is it doing uh it was
published February 20th uh so as of this
conversation just a few days ago uh I
think it's it's doing well it seems to
be well received uh a lot of my substack
subscribers are leaving positive
feedback on Goodreads and on Amazon and
it's been reviewed in uh various outlets
and so far I've been really pleased with
how things have have developed uh I hit
some strange obstacles on the way uh
initially my publisher and I thought
we'd do some kind of a mini book tour
maybe visit some bookstores uh do some
book signings and that ended up not
going through which was really
disappointing for me but fortunately
others have stepped into the breach and
we've been able to do some events
outside of the bookstore promo circuit
but so far I've been very pleased okay
so well that that was one of the things
I wanted to ask you about because I saw
some illusion to that on probably on on
X so why have you been unable to arrange
a standard book tour in in book in book
shops I mean you'd you'd assume that you
know book shops would want to sell books
since that's what they do and you know I
had I ran into trouble with book sellers
with my books because they would well
they certainly didn't promote them and
they often hid them and that was
particularly true in Canada m now what
effect that had is hard to say it might
have had a positive effect All Things
Considered because it was publicized but
still it's to call it appalling is to
say almost nothing it's it's this kind
of B Underground Shadow Banning that's
seems to be a characteristic of our age
okay so what exactly happened to you and
and and how do you explain it because
you know you'd think that your book if
your book would have been
published in the 60s hm it would have
been something like a Clarion call to
the
left right because you you you grew up
under restricted circumstances to say
the least and it's a A Tale Of You
prevailing despite that
um it isn't the sort of book that you
would think would
attract censorship attention like you're
not the guy to attract that attention
fundamentally so why don't you walk me
through that tell me what you make of it
yeah it was a it was a surprised to me I
didn't think that my book was
particularly controversial but perhaps
my sense of these things uh you know I I
don't know how much it can be trusted uh
because the line is always moving
constantly as far as what's acceptable
versus unacceptable and the the line
around political correctness and so
forth but I think the message in my book
was perhaps to some degree
unfashionable uh I write in the book
about the importance of responsibility
taking control of your life uh I in the
later chapters of the book I discuss
some of the phenomena around Elite
universities the self-inflicted
controversies at Yale and some of the
other Ivy League schools uh I describe
luxury beliefs and point out some of the
hypocrisy of the elites and I think a
lot of people who run bookstores maybe
didn't like that message very much uh
it's not a very trendy message to
describe because I don't attribute a lot
of the difficulties that my friends and
I experienced growing up to systemic
forces
or to other uh fashionable uh sources
and and
so your diagnosis of the problem my
diagnosis of the problem well I focus a
lot on family uh and the deterioration
of family and that is not a that that's
not a topic that a lot of educated
Elites want to talk about um the other
so that's one possibility for what was
happening with the bookstores and why I
got frozen out the other is uh the
associ that I have some of the
endorsements so uh the back of the book
I have endorsements from uh you know
people like Nicholas Christus uh but and
people like JD Vance and there's a a
blur from you as well Dr Peterson oh
that funny well a friend of mine
actually showed me he was at a bookstore
recently and um he showed me that
there's a sticker you know there's the
the book and then they have the sticker
of the book the bookstore price with
their logo and uh there were two copies
of my book and uh it was your name
carefully covered with these stickers of
the bookstore just covering Jordan B
Peterson and uh if it was one book maybe
a coincidence both books I thought there
was there's that's you know that was uh
intentional um and so I think that as
well but the thing is even even that I
think those two possible reasons are
intertwined because you deliver this
message as well about responsibility of
family of I think you and I you know we
we we discuss a lot of the same issues
and a lot of the same social ills that
are plaguing society and so the
bookstore promo circuit was was shocking
to me because I thought that I would
have been kind of the right person to do
that um you know there there are sort of
bigname people uh you know there are
certain people certain authors if they
were to do a book signing at a bookstore
it wouldn't work because they're too
famous and too well known and the store
would just get overrun and then on the
other hand there are authors who don't
have a lot of traction online not a lot
of presence in Social social media and
so on and they wouldn't be able to
attract very many people to come for a
signing whereas for someone like me I've
done a few events now I'm out here in
New York and I can attract a few dozen
people and that's roughly the right kind
of uh uh crowd you would expect for a
bookstore signing and yet they had no
interest but you know I would look at
other authors who are doing bookstore
signings and they even if they don't
have the same online presence as me they
have messages that the Legacy Media
really like uh there's that recent
Memoir uh in in defense of polyamory of
open marriages of you know and they and
and these bookstores love uh to host
authors like that because it's
provocative and interesting and it
promotes a certain dogma and my book is
not like that and I think that's one
possible reason they didn't want me well
the funny one of the things about your
book is that it's in many ways it's not
political
you know I mean my my sense of your book
was that you detailed out the
consequence of having your family life
fragmented and the and the consequences
you observed in the kids that you
associated with of having their family
lives
fragmented right and you
weren't most of what you said by doing
so was implicit rather than explicit
right you you grounded you grounded the
arguments in your lived experience so to
speak I mean that's not all you do
because well you also make reference to
the relevant research literature but
it's appalling indeed that you're not
encouraged to tell your story because
it's a it's very interesting story and
anyone with any sense would pay
attention to it I'll tell you part of
the reason it struck me but maybe what
I'll let you do first why don't you just
tell everybody who's watching and
listening just give them an outline of
the book's structure and and so they'll
have a better sense if they haven't read
the book of of what we're talking about
so it's an autobiography but why don't
you take it from the top and just walk
people through it right uh well I wrote
this this this Memoir uh describing my
very unusual trajectory into higher
education and some of the lessons and
observations I picked up along the way I
was born in Los Angeles uh into poverty
my mother uh she was from Soul she came
to the us as a young woman to study she
became addicted to drugs and was unable
to care for me uh we were homeless for a
time then we lived in a car and then
eventually we settled in this slum
apartment in
LA
and uh I never knew my father
um my mother didn't know who he was
either so she was so I was in this
apartment with my mother she would tie
me to a chair with a bathrob belt while
she would get High um she would have
visitors coming in and out of the
apartment at all hours of the day and
night um trading favors for drugs I uh
and and by the way I know all of this
information because later I received
this thick document full of information
uh from social workers forensic
psychologists and others who were
involved in my case when I was in the
foster care system in LA and so I read
these as an adult as I was writing the
book to prepare and
so my mother um
would she was very neglectful uh
eventually some neighbors called the
police they heard me crying and
struggling to break free from this chair
the police arrived and uh she's
questioned by the police and then later
by forensic psychologist asking uh who's
Robert's father you know what's going on
in this kid's life she didn't know who
my father was either um she claimed that
my father's name was Robert and that's
who I was named after but that was the
extent of the information she could
provide for them so at age three um my
mother was arrested I was placed into
the Los Angeles County foster care
system and spent the next just shy of
five years living in seven different
homes all across La um and how old were
you when that happened when you were
taken away from her I was three years
old I was three three yeah okay Y and so
and then you spent the next seven years
in a combination of homes in yeah in a
in a variety of different homes um later
I did get some information about my my
birth father so uh I actually took a 23
and me genetic ancestry test last year
went my whole life not knowing this but
uh I'm I'm half Hispanic on my father's
side uh and you know I made I made this
joke I posted this on X that you know I
wish I had known this when I was
applying to colleges um but you
know a friend of mine I I showed him the
results and he was like okay so you know
you you were sort of Asian mixed race he
was like you know you you went to bed
white adjacent and you woke up as an
underrepresented minority um
but I didn't I didn't know this uh and
so spent you know I lived in El Monte in
s San Gabriel Valley these are kind of
rundown areas in Los Angeles some of
these foster homes had upwards of 8 to
10 kids living in them um La is one of
the most overburdened I mean the Foster
system in the US in general is uh
extremely stressed as a system but La
it's especially bad so I remember some
of these homes we'd have four kid to a
room was two two bunk beds two kids on
the top bunk two kids on the bottom
there are just so many children who need
homes and not very many foster parents
available and so the tacit agreement
seems to be that you know as long as
kids are being fed and aren't actively
being abused that it's better for them
to be in one of these homes than to be
sleeping on the street which is which is
true but uh the system is um extremely
disorderly and it's it's just impossible
to supply care for that many kids uh in
you know for a limited number of
adults and so I document these
experiences in these homes it was
difficult for me um for a lot of reasons
but one reason was the level of
uncertainty and
instability because not only Not only
would I not know how long I would be in
any particular home but sometimes I'd
enter a foster home and I'd befriend
some of the other kids there
and then they would be taken um maybe uh
someone from their family of origin
would re-enter the picture and so the
kid would return to their aunt or mother
or family member uh or they'd go to
another home and so not you know it was
just a lot of I don't know where I'm
going to be I don't know where these
kids around me how much longer they're
going to be around
um and then eventually after seven
different homes in this cycle I was
adopted uh by this working class family
and we settled in this kind of Dusty
town in northern California called Red
Bluff which is located in one of the
poorest counties in the state and this
was the late 90s and at the time I
wasn't aware of this I was just you know
I was a little kid but in hindsight you
know having read a lot about class and
family formation and what's occurring uh
across the country I got this front row
seat to witness firsthand the kind of
family breakdown that Scholars like
Robert putam and Charles Murray and
others have been documenting over the
last few decades and so My adoptive
parents divorced and there was a lot of
chaos and financial catastrophe and
drama not just in my life with this
adopted family but the lives of my close
friends and those around me in this
bluecollar town and I described some of
my friends experiences and their
outcomes as well in the book and then
you closed the book I mean so you end up
in a family that's actually reasonably
stable for some period of time although
it had its instabilities as well it's
confused
instabilities but you go from there to
the
military and you actually this is
another reason maybe why your book is
contentious because you actually have
pretty positive things to say about your
military experience all things
considered I mean I think you you ran
into its limitations for you after it
had dis disciplined you to some degree
but you certainly do point out that for
you especially at that time in your life
the predictability and relative severity
of discipline predictive predictable
severity of discipline was actually very
good for you and you found mentors and a
pathway in the military that put you on
a solid
track yeah that got you funneled to
higher education might as well fill that
party in too well yeah that's that's
right I mean the enlisting in the first
place was it was not the most well well
thought through decision by the time I
was 17 going through all of these
experiences um I just knew that the path
I was on was not the right path um I saw
by this point I was sort of self-aware
and reflective enough that I saw where
my life was headed where the lives of my
friends were going I had two jobs in
high school I worked uh as a dishwasher
at an Italian restaurant and then I was
a bag boy at a grocery store and I had
some older male co-workers in their
early mid
20s and I would interact with them and
hang out with them and you know on the
one hand I was 17 and I kind of thought
these guys were cool because they'd buy
beer and weed for my friends and I and
you know they were you know they was
just older cool guys who had access to
things that my friends and I couldn't
access but I did even at that time I did
think it was strange that some you know
25-year-old guy would want to hang out
with a bunch of high schoolers and drink
beer with us and I thought to myself is
this what I want to be when I'm 25 and
you know that that kind of Carefree life
living weekend to weekend is fun when
you're 17 or 18 but when you're 25 it
just seemed a little pathetic and
so I barely graduated high school I had
a c minus average uh 2.2
GPA um I didn't know what my options
were as I mean well I knew my options as
far as you University were concerned
were basically non-existent but one of
my male High School teachers pulled me
aside uh one day and he he you know
initially during the school year he
would sort of prod me and berate me and
say why aren't you doing your homework
what's going on at home and I would blow
him off or I would back talk and then
eventually I think he kind of gave up
that route and just started talking to
me and asking me you know we talk about
sports or we talk about whatever
television we just talk about whatever
was interesting to me and one day he
showed me a picture of himself uh in an
Air Force uniform on his computer he
pulled up this photo and he basically
said this might be an option for you he
said you know I can tell that you're not
academically focused at the moment but I
can tell you're a smart kid and this
might be a good option for you and so
that you know that was one of the things
that planted the idea in my mind there
were others as well I I lived with my
and his brother my senior year of high
school uh and their father had also been
in the Air Force and he tossed that idea
out to me and so there were these kind
of male figures in my life not quite
Role Models but just older male figures
that I
trusted and at that time I I probably
wasn't aware of this but I was longing
for that kind of guidance from some
older male Mentor or figure just someone
who could give me some advice on what I
should be doing with my life I didn't
have a father I had no male Presence at
home and so the military became this
option I enlisted as soon as I graduated
high school I was still 17 years old um
I had to have my adoptive mother sign a
I mean essentially was a permission slip
because I was still legally underage I
was the youngest guy in my military unit
in basic training and you know in
hindsight that was probably the best
decision I ever made because it
completely removed me from all of the
bad influences of where I was growing up
and all of my all of the
sort
of all of the freedom that my friends
and I had I in the book I write about
this experience so a friend of mine had
been sentenced to prison and when he got
out I met him you know we we met at a
bar had some beers and I was talking to
him and we kind of came to this same
conclusion around the benefits of
limitations and constraints where we
both talked about you know I was telling
him about my experiences in the military
and basic training and all this stuff
and he was telling me about the routine
and the mundane everyday structured life
of
prison and we both came to this
conclusion that we both hated it at
first but then after a time we grew to
appreciate it for what it did for us for
providing these
boundaries and my friend I mean it was
funny he he actually said uh now that he
was out he actually sometimes missed it
he missed having that predictability and
that routine and that structure and
neither one of us had this when we were
growing up and so the military did sort
of contain my impulses and give me some
structure and channeled some of my
aggressive and impulsive energy toward
productive ends in the book I write
about the young male syndrome and how
the military finds ways to direct that
towards something that is
beneficial well you know the the the
standard hypothesis for hard-headed
criminologists with regards to
incarceration is pretty it's pretty
blunt and pretty
straightforward you can there you you
know of course about the age crime
curve so I think criminality among men
Peaks at 19 and then it precipitously
drops off after
26 and what prison does in many ways is
segregate very badly socialized men
until they're until they
mature now you know it doesn't do an
optimal job of that but the standard
penological Doctrine is it isn't
Rehabilitation even it's housing
especially for the repeat offenders it's
housing till they they say burn out but
that isn't really what happens they
don't burn out they mature and I think
what happens if you grow up in a very
very chaotic environment where there's
very little attention play paid to the
Future and everything's about the moment
that there is no structure that
facilitates cortical maturation
essentially you know you can imagine
that all those underlying competing
motivational drives sex power aggression
you know the standard Freudian panoply
they have to be brought together under
the rubric of some organizing structure
and that's essentially patriarchal it's
essentially masculine that that and I
don't think there's any difference you
know Freud talked about inhibition of
aggression and inhibition of sexuality
but that's not a smart way of thinking
about it he that was a major error on
Freud's part because it's not inhibition
it's integration and it's
maturation and the the cortex is an
inhibitory organ but it's an integrating
organ more than anything else and part
of the reason that you were crying out I
would say in the book for guidance is
because you were looking for a story
that represented a mode of being that
would be that is in fact the pathway to
maturity so here here's a definition of
maturity I'll try this out on and you
can tell me what you think about it so
the more immature you are the more
you're dominated by motivational and
emotional drives and they have a very
shortterm time Horizon the the time
Horizon is basically now so if you're
anxious you want to stop being anxious
now if you're in an incentive reward
State excited and enthusiastic you want
gratification now and now means what's
pleasurable in the moment what mat
maturation means is what works for you
in the widest variety of situations over
the longest possible span of time but it
also means something else it means
what's good for you and everyone around
you in multiple situations for the
longer longest period of time now you
need a certain amount of stability in
your environment for for an attitude
like that to even pay off but I don't
think there's any difference between
that expansion of time frame and the
integration of lower order drives and
emotions and maturation I think those
are all the same thing and if you're in
a chaotic environment see the other
thing too and this is something that's
relevant about your Memoir is my sense
has always been that a child that's
neurologically
intact needs one good
model that's that's enough and like you
can derive it various ways you derived
it partly from reading but then you put
it together peac meal from the fragments
of people you met as well right zero
Role Models is a catastrophe MH and and
part of the problem with fragmented
families is that zero Ro Role Models is
fre
is frequently the case yeah and so
there's just nothing for the for a young
person to grab on to the other thing
that struck me about there's many things
that struck your book about your book
another one of the things that struck me
too is that and I learned this a while
back is that schools are absolutely
appalling appalling Beyond Comprehension
at helping young children
plan like there's I built a program
online called future authoring that
helps people plan and if you give that
that program to young men before they go
to college this is especially ones true
for ones that don't have a very good
academic background if they sit down and
write a plan for 90 minutes unsupervised
with no feedback on the plan they're 50%
less likely to drop out wow yeah no
kidding no kidding 50% like it's insane
and what that points to is the fact that
no one ever sat them down and said okay
kid where do you want to be you could be
somewhere in five years that's the first
thing to announce like you could take
control of your life and you could be
somewhere in 5 years if you could be
there where would it be now I noticed in
your book you know when people did point
that out to you that was like a life
raft for you and you you make that point
clear with the story about seeing the
older guy that you talked about in
uniform like it's something isn't it
it's some vision of at least a possible
future right yeah yeah and it was um I
yeah I didn't have a lot
of stable guidance like you said it was
fragmentary it was through books through
pop culture through some of the people
around me um but yeah I mean on the on
the point around schools you know I I
remember I so in the book I I think it's
it's quite clear that I'd always had
some AC academic
inclination uh I was probably more
oriented towards academics than my
friends but my academic performance was
responsive to how stable my home life
was when there was stability at home and
predictability and adults providing some
oversight my my grades improved and I
started to become more
focused on homework and tests but
then inevitably there was just there
were so many reversals and up heils and
my grades responded to that as well and
by the time I reached High School my
grades were in the toilet so I did
pretty well in middle school and I got
placed into these Advanced courses in
high school and I was placed into
chemistry uh which was one of the
advanced science courses and once you
know this was this is kind of where my
head was at when I was I don't know 14
or 15 years old was the class was was
difficult and I didn't want to put in
the effort uh and I had no adults around
me saying you need to do this you need
to put in the effort and you know so
impulsive 15-year-old kid I went to my
guidance counselor and said oh I want to
be put into the lower level science
course and he he he gave me this you
know this spiel about how H you know
it's going to throw off your academic
trajectory but you know here's this
paper if you can have someone sign it
you know that's fine and so I forged my
mom's signature and went into the low
lower level science course and that was
the extent of it and you know when
you're a kid without much in the way of
guidance or mentorship or role model
it's very easy to make unwise decisions
like that uh and I I did that
repeatedly well the issue in that
situation is quite
clear why wouldn't you take the easy
rout out yeah I mean it's always like
psychologists always have things
backwards always they ask stupid
questions like why do people take drugs
that's a stupid question the question is
why don't people take drugs all the time
yeah cuz you can easily get you can get
lab animals under some circumstances to
just self- administer cocaine non-stop
right so the the the mystery of
short-term motivation isn't a mystery
the mystery is well under what
conditions might a young man be
motivated to do something difficult like
take a chemistry course for example and
the answer to that so this is a question
I have for you too because you could
read your
autobiography and your ups and downs
academically two ways you could say and
this is the way you lean so that partly
why I want to ask you the question your
grades varied with the stability of your
environment but I'm wondering to what
degree your grades varied with the what
would you say attractiveness of the
vision that you saw you know cuz like
when you got to the military and you saw
a career in front of you for example you
buckled down and worked like
mad now I know you also had the
stability there but you know I it's it's
not easy to to deter it's not easy to
discriminate between the the conditions
that enable people to thrive because
they can see that sacrifices they're
making sacrifices towards something they
they have clearly come to
Value versus they're supported by people
in a stable environment so I'm wondering
about your thoughts on that I yeah I
like that that uh
distinction I I mean perhaps sort of
implicitly or unconsciously I was
longing for that long-term Vision but I
I would just say like in the moment it
was you know I don't think very many 17
or 18 year olds are really um thinking
that far ahead into the future uh in in
a sort of a deliberate intentional sense
I I really think it was about sort of
responding to the incentives of the
moment and one of the things the
military did and one you know good
parenting and good sort of adults and
mentors do is sort of contain that
energy so that once the the young person
reaches the point where they have the
ability to reflect and consider the
future you know you sort of Shepherd
them to that point and now they can sort
of think about their own Futures and
what they want for their lives whereas
for me it was more just about making bad
decisions and and containing that to
reach that
point Financial experts thought we were
in the clear while these experts
anticipated rate Cuts inflation in the
United States is still a significant
economic concern think about it the US
is in the hole by $34 trillion and yet
we keep printing money which pushes the
prices you pay every day even higher so
you can bury your head in the sand or
you can do something about it diversify
a portion of your savings into gold gold
with Birch gold group gold is your hedge
against inflation and Birch gold makes
it easy to own they'll help you convert
your existing Ira or 401K into a tax
sheltered Ira in gold and you won't pay
a penny out of pocket make gold part of
your savings strategy and buy it from
Birch gold they've been the exclusive
gold partner of the daily wire for over
7 years now literally helping thousands
of our listeners and they can help you
too make gold part of your savings
strategy and buy it from Birch gold
they've been the exclusive gold partner
of the daily wire for over 7 years now
literally helping thousands of our
listeners and they can help you too text
Jordan to 9898 98 and get your free info
kit on gold then talk to a precious
metal specialist about protecting your
savings from persistent inflation with
gold text Jordan to 98 9898
[Music]
now right okay well so we could we could
say we could say that in a stable
environment maybe this is a way of
rectifying the two perspectives or or
reconciling them you could say that in a
stable well-run
household the the value of the future is
implicit in the rituals of the
household right like the household
itself the reason we would regarded as
well-run and stable is because it does
take a long-term
View and so and your point is yeah go
ahead well as as you're as you're saying
this and and then even as I'm thinking
about my own answer I'm realizing it's
it's I'm actually leaning more and more
towards your point now and and a story
just occurred to me that I tell in the
book actually um so there's this there
was a period in my adolescence where
there was some stability My adoptive
mother entered a relationship with this
woman um and they raised me from roughly
age 9 to 13 and with you know some
hiccups along the way and after but I
remember I was I was 13 years old and my
mother and her partner Shelly they um
you know I had some chores and some
responsibilities around the house but
they wanted me to uh to build a fire in
the mornings so that the house would be
warm by the time they got up at 7:00 to
get ready for work so they asked me to
get up at 5:45 5:30 and and do this for
them because you know heating a home
with with firewood was less expensive
than Central Heating and Northern
California can get a bit frosty in the
winters and I remember I argued with
them about this and I was angry uh this
idea that I had to get up so much
earlier than everyone else in the house
and my mom and shelle sat me down and
I'm 13 years old and again I probably
wasn't thinking that much about the
future but they use this they said you
know shelle she sat me down she said
your mom and I work all day to pay the
bills and you know you got to you're
getting older and you need to contribute
to the house and they they said you're
the man of the house and I remember when
they used this term um it sort of
reframed that chore it went from this
burden being put on me that I wanted to
battle against to no I'm a I'm a
productive member of this household and
I'm doing something for my moms for My
adoptive sister I'm doing something to
make their lives easier um and so
perhaps what you're saying about the
about this vision of the future if it's
put in the right way if the story is
told in a right way and that's what that
was the man of the house was this Vision
this story yeah that it did unlock
something for me in my mind but you know
it had to be it had to be presented to
me in that way I I wouldn't have arrived
there on no no right but but I mean I
would say that is the opportunity of
responsibility right and it does because
it's very easy and this is why
conservatives I think have a hard time
talking to young people it's easy to
make an obligation into a finger
wagging necessity right like a moral
obligation but that that isn't the right
way to frame a genuine responsibility
because if it's a genuine responsibility
it actually matters if you do it and the
reason it matters is because if you
don't do it things actually don't go
well like there there's there's a
there's there's a there's a value to
your sacrifice that's a good way of
thinking about it and they did strike
the right cord with you and I remember
that part of your book because what they
indicated to you was that that was a way
of signaling your mature worth not not
of signaling it I don't want to use that
language of expand in yourself up into
that role and so so how long did you
light the fire and and how did you feel
about doing that uh it I mean it was for
that entire winter and actually even
even the winter after that and I felt
you know I felt great about doing it
after that I mean you know dayto day it
was you know obnoxious and burdensome
and you know there were mornings I woke
up and wished I didn't have to do it but
when I would see you know my mom and
Shelly and everyone in the house wake up
after me and you know the house was warm
and I could see that and people were
comfortable and you know when I woke up
it was freezing and then when they woke
up it was warm and I would go to school
in the mornings with that knowledge and
right yeah I felt I felt good about
myself for doing that yeah yeah one of
the bright SP see that's very well that
well that's so interesting right because
that that shows you too that that the
idea that you're inhibiting your
impulsiveness is not right is the what
you're doing is you're transforming the
idea of responsibility into an incentive
reward technically by associating with a
with an overarching goal like a but a
but a genuine goal and you might say
well goals are arbitrary it's a morally
Rel moral relativism argument but
they're not arbitrary because for
example if the house is cold then people
suffer now you could say well that's
arbitrary too but you know if you're the
sort of person who thinks that suffering
is arbitrary and and you can make
relative arguments about it there's
there's no sense talking to you anyways
because it's just not going to go
anywhere but it's so interesting to see
that you know the the proper framing of
that task trans I know I understand the
fact that it was still difficult for you
still had to get up in the morning when
it was cold and light the fire you know
so it didn't change the dis the proximal
discomfort but they awakened you to a
higher order way of apprehending your
environment you know and it's clearly
the case it's continually the case
through your autobiography that when
someone opens a door like that for you
in a way that you that got to you you
know that you found credible that you
instantly motivated you even did that to
yourself to some degree with
reading so why don't you walk through
that too because you know that was the
first account I had read of someone who
learned to read well at an old enough
age so they
remember the realization so you know
what happens to lots of kids and this is
so appalling because there's no excuse
for it whatsoever so reading is
burdensome until you can read for
meaning right so if you're sounding Out
words or even if you're sounding Out
phrases or even if you're still trying
to figure out sentences you know because
you haven't automatized the perceptions
then it's effortful but as soon as you
cross that threshold and now you're
reading for meaning it's instantly
insanely rewarding and so what you need
to teach kids how to read is mass
practice at automatization right so they
need to see B PS q's and D's 10,000
times so that they build a neural
circuit that
just recognizes letters recognizes
two-letter combinations three-letter
combinations you know common words then
common phrases that's about when you get
to be an expert reader and but you can
remember actually working through that
yourself so why don't you tell the story
about learning to read why you decided
to do that and then also what reading
did for you right yeah I I uh didn't
learn to read until I was seven and you
know most people have memories of age
seven and that was an important memory
for me so I was changing schools every 3
to six months uh changing homes and no
one read to me and
so I had to teach myself um
um I remember it being a really I I
remember just being embarrassed
initially you know by that point second
grade teachers would start to call on
kids to read aloud in class and you know
I would make a joke or or uh say I
didn't bring the right book or I would
find ways to get out of it but uh I
remember at one point a uh my teacher
said you know she asked me what I wanted
to be when I grew up and I think I said
I wanted I wanted to be a scientist and
this was because I'd caught some some
bit of Bill NY the Science Guy on TV
back in the 90s uh at this time and uh
you know she said if you want to be a
scientist you have to learn to read and
I said Bill n never reads and you know
she said well he doesn't read on TV but
you know every scientist has to learn to
read and so what you know like okay so
if I if I want to be a scientist I have
to read it sounds like and then by that
point I started to piece together that
really if you want it to be anything you
have to read um and so the teacher let
me borrow some kindergarten level books
I took them home and slowly worked my
way through it and you know I knew the
alphabet and I knew how to sound out
each letter but it took a lot of effort
to get to the to that breakthrough point
that you just mentioned of okay here are
the individual letters and then here are
the words and then you put the words
together and then after working through
that repeatedly again with books meant
for four and fiveyear olds and I'm seven
uh finally it started to click and I
could see the images in my mind of okay
you know now things are clicking for me
and there's a story being told here uh
but it you know I I didn't even
understand that that's what I was
supposed to be doing when I was reading
I would listen to stories that others
would tell me when they would read yeah
I wonder if that's the point where you
where the auditory and the visual CeX
are now there's an overlap area that
between them and the overlap areas
between the higher orders higher order
areas of the cortex are the areas that
uh Lura Alexander Lura the great Russian
neuros psychologist identified with
Consciousness per se I wonder if that
breakthrough moment when you cuz that
was quite striking in your book cuz you
said you remember when you became
proficient enough at reading which is
really an auditory phenomenon right it's
like you're using your eyes as ears when
you're reading and then all of a sudden
it's hooked to the your visual
imagination right that connection
emerges it's got to be an overlapping
system so now the words can activate the
images and that's when true
understanding begins it was very
interesting to me to see that you could
actually remember when that that
happened you know but it's a sad thing
you know it's this is this is an
unforgivable failing of the education
system because computerized tutors could
teach every child to automatize letter
and word recognition oh it's like the
smart kids the higher IQ kids are going
to learn to automatize
faster but it would be a rare kid indeed
who wouldn't get there with sufficient
Mass practice and a computer computers
are so good at that you know so good
presenting presenting rewarding
presenting rewarding presenting
rewarding and that's all you need you
just need that immediate feedback now
see you said something very interesting
in that story too e because you linked
your motivation once again to something
approximating a vision or a plan you
know you said you had nursed as a child
even though it was just more or less a
casual encounter with Bill Nye you
thought well maybe a scientist is
something I could be okay so now that
gleamed as a a distal vision and then
the teacher informed you that you were
going to have to learn to read because
you got to ask yourself you know what in
the world was it that actually compelled
you to swallow your pride and admit that
you could only read kindergarten books
that's a tough blow and it's really easy
for kids who should have learned
something earlier to do everything they
can not to admit that to themselves
because it's embarrassing so but you did
admit it to yourself and then you went
and you actually studied which is by
yourself which is actually quite a
difficult thing to do when when you're
not extracting out meaning from the
words do you remember at that time like
was it because you had I don't want to
put hypothesis into your mind but what
do you think it was that actually
motivated you to do that
work H well I think I think a part of it
was maybe a sort of a baser motivation
of just not wanting to be embarrassed in
class anymore when the teachers would
call on me to read uh wanting to keep up
with the other kids being able to
communicate with you know CU kids would
talk about books or you know be able to
make friends and and to not be you know
this Oddball kid who always had to find
ways to skirt the coursework uh and and
then yes seeing seeing people on TV or
people movies and these images of of
people who seem to be interesting and
successful and so on and that seemed
like something I yeah that I wanted to I
I aspired to something like that I mean
it's funny like you you you mentioned
you know high IQ kids can sort of find
way into teaching themselves to read and
going down that path and that's that is
what I did but I mean it's funny so so
right around this time when I was
teaching myself to read I was doing so
badly in school that um the teacher and
my social worker they they thought that
I might have had a learning disability
um and again I was changing schools all
the time and changing homes and you know
in in hindsight I thought it was a
little bit you know it's it's it's
ridiculous that and you have this young
boy who's not doing well in school and
the instead of sort of investigating
this you know living in foster care and
all of the instability and
disorder the response was to medicalize
it or to put some kind of diagnostic
label on it and you know fortunately so
they sent this psychologist to the home
and I took this test and I scored I
actually scored just below average so I
was like in the range of normal and part
of the reason I scored so low I did okay
on the other portions uh the other
subdomains of the test but the verbal
score was really low and that's because
I didn't I know how to read um and some
of the you know some of the questions I
gave this half-hearted effort it was a
very sort of messy my responses to this
and again I have I have the the the
files and the reports from this period
And so you know it's just you know
coincidence or you know very fortunate I
guess that I I scored just high enough
to avoid being labeled and medicalized
and so on um but one of the points I try
to make in the book as well you know the
question around IQ and nature and
nurture and so on is that having a
having curiosity and academic aptitude
is is necessary but not sufficient to do
well in school and so I had the sort of
raw
ingredients um but that's that you know
that's just one portion of it you also
needed to be channeled you need all of
the other things you and I been
discussing and I didn't have any of that
and so I it wasn't until I was in an
environment uh where you know my you
know in order for for my habits to have
been stable and predictable I needed to
be in an environment that was stable and
predictable and once I reached that
environment then those good qualities
started to shine through they shine
through on occasion when I was in school
but it wasn't the same and so yeah the
the reading portion was important once
once I learned to read um that became a
a source of comfort and it was soothing
for me
uh once I started to go to school
libraries check out books I started to
read biographies and Memoirs and
this was a way for me to you know I was
sort of drawn to people who also had
undergone and risen above difficult
circumstances and I didn't know at that
time you know I wasn't consciously aware
that I was seeking out these stories for
some specific reason but in hindsight I
think I was looking for some kind of
inspiration or some a source of a s of
guidance yeah yeah well definitely
definitely and and and unsurprisingly I
mean that's what stories are for
fundamentally and it doesn't it's not
surprising at all that you would
gravitate to the ones that bore most
specifically on your circumstances it's
also interesting too you know that this
is part of that interplay between in
environmental instability and planning
there isn't a lot of point in planning
if your plans are always going astray
for reasons that you can't control right
and it is also something that can
undermine your faith in planning itself
and one of the things the military did
for you clearly was set up a
circumstance where the rules of the game
were very clear right if you if you did
the work you were going to get the
reward and that actually worked right
and so you say in your book for example
that there was one at one point you were
promoted much earlier much more quickly
in the training regime than was typical
right so you could also see a direct
payoff there you know it's it's
shouldn't say direct it worked on both
ends Jordan it was it was the reward was
immediate you know you you perform these
tasks and Excel you'll be rewarded and
then on the other side of that if you uh
commit these transgressions if you
violate these guidelines you'll
immediately and swiftly be punished I
think both of those things were
important you know you're sort of almost
trapped the military is like this I
don't know like a giant Skinner box or
something of like do this you know you
know positive reinfor enforcement
negative it's all there and and so even
something as simple as failing a drug
test so they have these random drug
tests you never know when it's going to
occur if you fail a drug test you can be
court marshalled and go to military
prison whereas in the outside world for
my friends for example who didn't follow
that same path I mean you can do a lot
of drugs you can have a lot of
promiscuous sex you can commit a lot of
crimes and drink and drive you can do
all of these things and that can carry
on for years before finally the
consequences arise from that whereas the
military had this system in place that
you know if you drink and drive once uh
and you're caught you know that's you
know then it's prison if you do this you
know it's the the penalties are very
explicit clear and Swift and so it works
it works on both both ends punishment
and reward and I think both of those
pieces in place were important for me I
mean it's funny I I did do well on the
military exams and the promotion and I
was always promoted ahead of schedule
and it's it's strange because even even
in those moments my good and bad
qualities kind of shine through I I was
promoted early and I I earned those
promotions but you know as I as I was
writing the book and describing my
experiences it may not have have been
ideal for me to have achieved promotion
so early because in the military at
least in the Air Force at this time once
you reach a certain rank they allow you
to move off base and get a house or a
place outside in the civilian world you
know you still go to the base for work
when you're on duty but then you go home
to your residence and so I got promoted
very quickly and when I was 19 I got a
house with some friends off base and we
turned this into like this giant kind of
party house and that allowed me to make
bad decisions and drink a lot and get
into trouble
and so strangely uh you know it's it's
almost sort of ironic that the fact that
I was able to excel led to this point
where I was able to be in a position of
complete Freedom again and again start
to make self-defeating decisions so
anyway we are in the midst of Lent the
40 days leading up to Easter many
Christians are choosing to give up
alcohol social media and other
distractions to focus more on prayer
fasting and giving Hallow's annual pray
40 challenge is one of their most
popular last year over 1 million people
joined this year's pray 40 challenge
focuses on surrender and includes
meditations on the powerful book he
leadeth me this is a story about a pre
to became a prisoner and slave in the
Soviet Union during the Cold War his
story is one of Ultimate Surrender and
we are called to surrender our worries
anxieties problems and lives to God
there will also be lent music lent
specific Bible stories and other lent in
prayers like The Seven Last Words of
Christ with Jim cisel hallow is truly
transformative and will help you connect
with your faith on a deeper level so
what are you waiting for join Hallow's
prayer 40 challenge today download the
Hallow app at hall.com / Jordan and
you'll get an exclusive 3month free
trial of all 10,000 plus prayers and
meditations that's hall.com
[Music]
Jordan right right well one of the
things okay so so let's talk about the
the chaos a bit more you know because
when I was reading your book there's
there's certain overlap in our
experience because I came from a little
town way the hell out in the middle of
nowhere and it was only about 50 years
old and it was a working class
community and most of my friends never
went to college or university a few did
but not not many and but there were some
differences between some important
differences between my time of
upbringing in
yours okay so almost all my parents
friends had intact
families so my mom and dad had let's say
five sets of close family friends and
this was also true for my relatives by
the way my my mom and dad's siblings so
my aunts and my uncles virtually no
divorce it was also true for my
friends now my relationship with my
father was much better than the
relationship most of my friends had with
their fathers that was often a
consequence of alcoholism not always but
often but all my friends who had
certainly the same kind of delinquent
tendency as the people that as you and
the people that you describe hanging
around with they all had intact
families right so the thing that really
struck me about reading your biography
was the additional cataclysmic
consequences of continually fragmented
primary
relationships yeah well this is I mean
it's yeah it's that is an interesting
point I mean I remember uh listening to
you sort of describe your early life in
other uh platforms and podcasts and
mediums and thinking about how sort of
working class communities have changed
over time um so I cite uh some
statistics from uh Charles Murray's book
coming apart uh where you know one one
of the most striking ones from that book
is that in
95% of children born in the US
regardless of social class socioeconomic
status were raised by both of their
birth parents and by 2005 for the upper
class for people with college educated
parents with white collar
jobs it dropped from 95% in 1960 to 85%
in 2005 so slight dip but it's still the
the norm two parent intact families are
the norm in kind of Upper and upper
middle class areas whereas for the
working class it dropped from 95% in
1960 to 30% in 2005 um these are non-
colge educated Blue Collar working class
and that when I read that statistic it
perfectly reflected my own experiences
you know now know post College the
friends that I have made since you know
leaving the military and obtaining
degrees and so on all of them without
fail have been raised in intact families
and then I think back to Red Bluff and
my time there and I had five close
friends growing up I write about some of
their experiences in the book and of the
six of us none of us were raised by both
of our our birth parents there was me
sort of raised in foster homes in
varying states of disorder um I had
friends raised by single moms one friend
raised by a single dad one friend raised
by his grandmother because his mom was
addicted to drugs and his dad was in
prison and that's like a very common
picture now of what these communities
look like you know I I remember uh
seeing an interview with with you Jordan
I don't remember which which it was but
you described
how family deterioration has sort of hit
people um based on sort of their level
of marginalization and vulnerability and
predictions and so forth and how it sort
of hit sort of poor black families first
and then you know poor white families
workingclass families and now what I was
seeing in Red Bluff by the late 90s even
kind of lower middle class families were
also kind of deteriorating more and more
sort of creeping more and more upward
but there's still that sort of rarified
upper segment of society the top
quintile say the top 20%
uh that they are almost completely
shielded from this and have no exposure
to what's happening uh in the rest of
society yeah well let's let's let's go
there I want to walk through your
biography a bit more so that we can talk
about your experiences with higher
education maybe we can meld that into
what we're going to talk about next okay
so I left my little town and got a
college education first and then I went
to a fairly large University in Edmonton
and then I went to Mill and so I was
kind of climbing up the the ladder of
sophistication and Ed educational
sophistication and urban size right and
so and then I went from Migel to Harvard
and so I came from that little town and
hit the top of the academic pyramid it's
certainly that was the case in the 1990s
and that was really something and so I
got a chance to see so in Alberta in the
in the province I grew up and there
wasn't much of a class structure at all
Alberta was too new to have a class
structure Montreal had a clear class
structure and Boston of course much
clearer than Montreal even and so I got
to see what it meant that a class
structure existed and one of the things
I really came to understand as I
progressed through the university system
was this warped elitist culture that
increasingly came to characterize the
universities and so what I saw look a
lot of the students I had at Harvard
were really top rate kids and Harvard in
the 9s was a very merit-based
institution now if you were a legacy
student if your parents had gone to
Harvard you had an edge at admissions
but even so the probability that you
were going to be a legacy student who
couldn't cut it was pretty damn low so
and the typical student was extremely
academically gifted and then good at at
least two other things right so these
were Stellar students but the more
radical types
they had this proclivity that really
Disturbed me which was that having all
the Privileges of being privileged
wasn't nearly enough they needed to have
all the Privileges of being privileged
and all the Privileges of being
underprivileged at the same time and so
I want to run a variant of the luxury
beliefs idea past you because I think
luxury beliefs have which is a lovely
phrase by the way um they have two
dimensions the first
is they provide you with a universal
explanation for very complex phenomena
so you don't have to think about them
ever again and the oppressor oppressed
narrative fits that
perfectly right because you can analyze
it's like Marxism gone it's like manic
Marxism it's Marx at least had the sense
to note that the primary differentiator
in terms of Oppression was economic and
you can make a reasonable case that to
those who have more AC crru and you can
also make a case that once you have it's
easily easy to engage in regulatory
capture to make the playing field unfair
so you can sustain your advantage okay
and so if you're going to get throw the
marxists their bone that would be the
bone to throw them well Marxism fell out
of favor in the 1970s even among
intellectuals although they were very
annoyed about it and then it morphed
into this metam Marxism where every
single possible comparison between
people became an oppressor oppressed
comparison now the advantage to that is
that you can learn that
analytic process in 10 minutes so we did
some research in
2016 that showed very clearly that the
best predictor of politically correct
authoritarianism so you can imagine that
that's this insistence upon an oppressor
oppressed narrative there's a cloud of
ideas that surrounds that the best
predictor of that was low verbal
intelligence it was a walloping
predictor it was correlated I think it
was negative .48 it was more correlated
than grades and IQ it was a walloping
correlation okay but but there's another
element too that and this is probably
more Germaine specifically to the notion
of luxury belief is
that imagine that people have
beliefs because they explain the world
but also imagine that they have beliefs
because they confer upon the holder
unearned moral
virtue and this this oppressor oppress
narrative is a two for one because it
provides you with a comprehensive
explanation of every sociological
political and economic interaction
imaginable because they can all be
viewed through the lens of power plus it
presents you with a one move solution to
being moral and it's sorry there's three
elements the one move solution is you
identify with the oppressed you're
virtuous but then there's a then there's
the shadow of that which is once you've
identified the
oppressor you have a valid Target for
your darkest
desires so you got three three
attractions to that dread Doctrine right
stupid people can understand it quickly
with no effort that works out real well
in Departments of educ ation for example
or faculties of Education or social work
yes absolutely well we know perfectly
well that the disciplines in
universities that have the students with
the lowest IQ are the most woke like the
data are not are crystal clear so
they're crystal clear right so so it's
very attractive if you're not very
bright and that's also attractive to
your teachers if they're also not very
bright and I'm talking about you
faculties of Education professors and so
and then you are morally virtuous
because you're standing for the
oppressed or or for the yeah for the
oppressed or you can even claim
oppression for yourself at least by
proxy and so there you get to have the
advantage of being in the oppressor
class which you clearly are if you're in
Elite University but because you're an
ally you you don't have to right exactly
you don't have to pay any attention to
that plus now you have a target for your
this is where I think the anti-Semitism
is really instantly understandable right
because there's nothing more fun than
being anti-semitic with with a moral
twist but if you read the history of
anti-Semitism it's always been that way
yeah that's not new that's not new you
identify the Jews as oppressors and then
you're moral for persecuting them and
that's perfect right if you're if you're
resentful and bitter and you need a
target for your for your bile and
spite that that oppressor oppressed
narrative it just gives you all of that
at once and that seems to me so you have
work worked a lot at fleshing out this
idea of luxury beliefs and pop and I
believe coined the term and popularized
it which is you know quite an
achievement because it's hard to it's
hard to hit a phrase so accurately that
it becomes
a you know it becomes well it becomes a
known phrase it becomes part of the
culture you you you have to have a kind
of poetic accuracy to do that so tell me
what you think about that
conceptualization of luxury belief and
if if there's anything that in your it
lacks well so so uh I coin this term
luxury beliefs uh defined as ideas and
opinions that confer status on the elite
while inflicting costs on the lower
classes and no I I think that all of
those sort of ideas that you laid out
there uh fall under that framework uh a
core feature of a luxury belief too is
that the believer is sheltered from the
consequences of his or her belief um and
so you know as as you're describing this
you know the oppressor oppressed you're
you don't have to think too deeply I'm
reminded of a quote from the the
cognitive scientist uh Pascal Boer uh he
has this line theory is information for
free and it's kind of this
tongue-and-cheek line that um you don't
you know once you have the theory you
don't have to learn anything because you
just enter this new environment and you
learn a few facts but you have this
Theory available to you to just sort of
twist everything into this uh system
compression
Al yeah yeah yeah a compression algorthm
yeah yeah definitely often a biased
compression algorithm MH yeah yeah and
it allows you the difficult work of
learning yeah yeah yeah yeah well and
then if you're if you're removed from
the consequences which you are if you're
protected by your wealth then you also
are never in a situation where your
idiot theories can be disproven yeah yes
ex yeah and and then by the time your
ideas are implemented into policy or
into the culture you move on to the next
thing and you can just sort of out
outrun the consequences of your own
beliefs it doesn't always work that way
but but it but often it does um and then
yeah the oppressor oppressed the uh the
ability
to claim the mantle
of virtue I mean I saw that so often uh
I I see it still at Elite
universities that you know these
inhabitants these graduates students and
graduates of elite universities it's you
know it's not enough for them to be
members of the sort of socioeconomic 1%
but they also want to be seen as good
people and I think they you know they
they wrestle with some of this guilt I
think for being so privileged and so
fortunate and so they uh attempt to
compensate by you know exploiting I mean
I saw this a lot at Yale they're
exploiting whatever commonality they H
have with historically mistreated groups
um and some of it honestly seemed
strategic and duplicitous uh because you
know these are very competitive
institutions and every Edge helps and so
if you can claim to be non-binary or you
can claim to be a member of this or that
or the other group then you can get an
edge in a prestigious internship or into
the law school of your choice or
whatever uh student
organization did you know a baby heart
begins to beat at just 3 weeks at 5
weeks that heartbeat can be heard on
ultrasound and this can sometimes be
their only defense in the womb that's
where pre-born steps in pre-born rescues
200 babies every day from abortion
simply by providing mothers with an
ultrasound after hearing her child's
heartbeat and seeing its perfectly
formed body in the womb she's twice as
likely to choose Life by 6 weeks the
baby's eyes are forming by 10 weeks a
baby's able to suck his or her thumb
preborn needs our help to save these
precious lives for just $28 you could be
the difference between the life or death
of a child and if you become a monthly
sponsor you'll receive stories and
ultrasound pictures of the lives you
helped save all gifts are tax deductible
and 100% of your donation goes towards
saving babies to donate dial pound 250
and say the keyword baby that's pound
250 baby or go to pre-born
docomo that's preborn
docomo
[Music]
well you can also see how that can
produce so a lot of Psychopathology is
positive feedback loop gone mad right
and so you can see a positive feedback
loop there because the ideology tilts in
the direction of privileging
marginalization well then all you have
to do is claim marginalization to become
privileged well then the thing is just
like you're just done especially as you
pointed out when they're really
competitive types and there's nothing I
mean one of the real advantages to the
us Elite let's say is there insanely
driven competitiveness but look the hell
out if that's taken a you know a bent
turn because now it's going to be well
it's it's so interesting too because as
you point out it's competition for
marginalization without bearing any of
the cost of
marginalization right so that's a pretty
good deal and there probably more
nefarious things going under the on
under the surface too like like uh what
reproduction um interference with
reproduction of other people is a mating
strategy it's a reproductive strategy
and so God only knows how deep that goes
just just very so I I I did read the
study that His Name Escapes me but he's
a professor I believe at the Columbia
business school and it's really
interesting so he did the study of
students at Elite universities and their
willingness to
disclose marginalized
identities and what he found was that
for you know for the for the identity
categories that the elite care a lot
about uh that that they claim are baguer
and disadvantaged and oppressed and so
on sexuality ethnicity orientation those
things uh that students at Elite
universities uh are not concealing those
identities that typically in public
settings they are willing to discuss
these aspects of their identity the only
there was only one marginalized identity
that students were very reluctant to
discuss publicly at Elite universities
in those settings and to me
unsurprisingly that identity was was uh
low socioeconomic status that students
were embarrassed about being very poor
if they came from those backgrounds
well these don't talk about is class
well it's so interesting he because you
can think of this
postmodern pathology as a variant of
Marxism but it's actually a rebellion
against Marxism at the same time right
because it isn't that the axis of
Oppression it's not only that they've
multiplied it's that the axes of of
Oppression have multiplied and
supplanted the
economic right so so the one the one
axis where the oppressor oppressed
narrative can probably obtain the most
purchase is the one that has the least
cache so if you're poor and white it's
irrelevant the fact that you're poor is
irrelevant yeah I mean even if you're
poor and non-white honestly I mean I
mean it's really interesting these
institutions where there's a lot of
there's a lot of embarrassment about
being very rich so students aren't going
to brag about coming from very wealthy
families they'll conceal that identity
but they are also you know the poor
students will also conceal that identity
as well it's like everyone wants you
know that that the the myth in America
everyone's middle class and and I think
there's something about universities too
that no student wants to be known as
poor no student wants to be known as
rich but being poor is a like that that
is like like you're describing that is
actually um something that Mark's got
right that actually being very poor is
uh very difficult uh especially in in in
the modern West that these other
identities we've gone a long way to
becoming more tolerant and welcoming and
so on but being being poor regardless of
time and place it's always difficult and
that's the one thing that these
universities and the the students within
them don't want to discuss or
concentrate on well I also think that
the the overwhelming emphasis on sexual
identity has an unbelievably Dark Shadow
too because I mean sexuality like any
Primal Drive is
very when in its full manifestation it's
very focused on the
immediate now everyone knows that
sexuality like aggression can be
exploitative in fact the woke types
squeak about that all the time because
they view most heterosexual normativity
as exploitative sexuality they know
they're perfectly aware that sexuality
can be exploited of but if you're if
you're out for a hedonistic time then
valorizing your sexual identity is the
best way of transforming a vice into a
moral virtue right it's very it's
unbelievably it's unbelievably dark now
one of the things I've been quite struck
by recently too so there's a lot of
research on the dark tetrad now right
psychopathy
melanism um narcissism and sadism
because they had to add sadism because
it looks like those other three
culminate in
sadism okay so here's a question what
predicts short-term mating
proclivity answer is well it's dark
tetrid proclivity and that that's re
related to something even more deep even
more deep biologically because there's
two types of reproductive strategy
there's K and R and K means carrying
capacity and R just think means just
reproduction like a mosquito is an R
reproducer so it has like a million
Offspring and like one lives beings are
the ultimate Exemplar of K strategizes
very few Offspring extremely high
investment but then within human beings
they're K andr
reproducers and the r reproducers are
the dark tetrad types and so you can't
have sexual
licentiousness on the basis of identity
without inviting in the sadistic
Psychopaths so that's another fun little
little twist on the luxury belief
phenomenon on this idea of you know
defining I mean it's what I find
interesting about people
who want to speak and Proclaim about
their identities around sexual
orientation is there many people are
happy to identify with this sexual
orientation or that but very PE few
people seem to be willing or eager to be
identified with their actual sexual
history in terms of their actual
behavior um and I'm I'm thinking here
around this idea around [__] shaming or
around uh how many partners you've had
or you know what what young people now
call Body Count um there's a lot of
concern around you know don't speak
about that don't shame people for their
but it's interesting because people will
identify with the label but then disavow
the action around the label or or any
label really yeah their sexual history
well I would say as a clinici I would
say the rationale for that's quite clear
because look one of the best predictors
one of the the one of the most reliable
correlates and predictors of later
criminality is early
promiscuity that's been known for like
40 years and it's partly because the
psychopathic narcissistic mellian
sadists exploit other people and
themselves for sexual gratification well
the reason that there's a brewhaha about
[__] shaming is because
the hedonistic narcissists don't want to
be called out for their behavior and so
what they do is they make being held
responsible for their own deviant and
exploitative behavior they make being
called out on that a moral failing of
the person they're accusing yeah which
is a really interesting um maneuver and
it reminds me of there was a big study
in 20 I want to say it was 2020 um which
found that the so this was on the dark
Triad s sadism wasn't studied in this
particular paper but they found that the
dark Triad traits correlated with victim
signaling yeah that's a typical cluster
B it's typical cluster B Psychopathology
it's like the way that you you cover up
your predation with the claim of
victimization right absolutely
absolutely and it was really interesting
I mean the researchers of this paper um
you know they they described how you
know billions of dollars are lost in
insurance fraud cases and or hundreds of
millions rather in insurance fraud cases
and so like people will lie to Advantage
themselves and people who score highly
in the dark Triad are especially likely
to do so and they note that in modern
Western societies um we have this
attitude towards people who are
victimized that they should be um
compensated and treated well and
sympathized with and people who are high
in the dark Triad are very good at sort
of monitoring their environment and
looking at what strategies they can
execute to extract some kind of social
or professional or sexual reward and now
more and more it's um you know claiming
the mantle of of victimhood which is I
mean I guess it's important to be clear
that it's not that people who are
actually victimized are likely to score
high in the- dark Triad is that people
high in the dark Triad are very
manipulative and aware that now
pretending like wearing the the
camouflage of victimhood can be
advantageous and you know it's It's
Tricky as a society because we want to
sympathize with victims but also we want
to be aware of the dark Triad
types no one likes to talk about life
insurance but it's incredibly important
and you need to include it in your
financial planning this year start
shopping now with policy genius find the
right policy to protect your family
today and give yourself the peace of
mind that comes with knowing that if
something were to happen to you your
family can cover all their expenses
while getting back on their feet policy
genius's technology makes comparing life
insurance quotes from America's Top
insurers easy in just a few clicks you
already have a life insurance policy
through work but that might not offer
enough protection for your family's
needs and it may not follow you if you
leave your job you need a backup plan
with policy genius you can find life
insurance policies that start at just
$292 per year for $1 million of coverage
some options offer same day approval and
avoid unnecessary medical exams policy
genius has licensed agents who can help
you find the best fit for your needs
when they make it this easy there's no
excuse not to do it policy genius works
for you not the insurance companies that
means they are not incentivized to
recommend one insurer over another so
you can trust their guidance save time
money and provide your family with a
financial safety net using policy genius
head to policygenius.com Jordan or click
the link in the description to get your
free life insurance quotes and see how
much you could save that's
policygenius.com
[Music]
Jordan okay so that's that's been well
modeled by the the game theorists so if
you have a group of Cooperators so let's
say they're agreeable and they are
sympathetic to the I I don't want to say
victimized I want to say to the to the
hurt
and and uh the the sick the hurt and the
infantile
right the agreeable Cooperators will
attend to the the sick the elderly and
the infantile right then you could think
they're the ones who are genuinely in
need they're also the ones for whom
provision of help is
advantageous so now imagine you have a
group of those people together and
they're all cooperating they do just
fine but if you throw one psychopath
into the equation he takes everything
right and so so this has been modeled
out very well is that the pathology of
agreeableness is that it's it's in
definitely open to
subversion right and so you need that's
why you need and and of course the
psychopathic types the narcissists they
know this perfectly well especially the
cluster B types because they're
absolutely willing to Proclaim victim
status as loudly as it can possibly be
proclaimed on any Dimension whatsoever
to gain an advantage to gain the upper
hand practically but see the moral upper
hand I think the the right way to think
about this is that there isn't anything
more valuable than
reputation right because there's no
difference between reputation there's no
difference between reputation and wealth
fundamentally I mean even monetary
wealth is a form of abstracted
reputation so yeah you know it's just
being tokenized essentially like money's
money's tokenization of reputation well
the problem is is reputation can be
gamed and we know too that young women
are much much more likely to fall for
the de dark tetrad types because they
mimic they mimic reputation yeah that
that's their confidence and competence
and yeah exactly they have the
confidence of the competent without the
competence yes I mean it's it's that's
yeah people uh value especially more and
more now I mean this is a the discussion
around cancel culture and mobbing and
all of these things I mean people treat
it like it's unserious but people care
deeply about how they're viewed in the
eyes of others and social esteem and I
remember there was a study a few years
ago that I read about um uh this came
out in in 2017 Roy balme was an author
on this paper I don't recall everyone uh
on here but they basically found that
you know they looked at the world value
survey and pulled out certain items and
found that right next to physical safety
uh reputation was the second priority uh
for people and they found I mean it was
interesting some of the stud studies
that they did where they gave Force
choice questions to participants in a in
a separate study in this paper where
they asked people essentially you know
would you rather have a body part
amputated or be known as a Nazi or be
known as a pedophile and most of the
participants said they would rather lose
an arm or a leg than be known as
something so vile as you know pedophile
or not I mean people care deeply about
about these things and so dark Triad
types are aware of this they know how to
Target people people's reputations and
for mobs and I mean I'm really
interested just all of the sort of the
correlates of the dark tetrad dark Triad
these traits one of them is age you're
probably aware of this Dr Peterson that
there's an inverse correlation between
age and scores on the dark tetrad such
that younger adults score higher on
these traits than older adults and yet
we have this situation more and more in
society and on college campuses and
elsewhere where older adults are
abdicating their responsibility and
letting young adults who uh
disproportionate number of them would
actually qualify for clinical levels of
psychopathy and narcissism but generally
speaking they score higher than average
on on those scales anyway and you know
just a large share of them uh are eager
for power for influence for wealth and
they're willing
to do whatever they can and take
whatever maneuver is possible well I I
think there I think there's something
also that's even more ominous going on
ra
because so the typical psychopath
historically speaking was a
Wanderer right an itinerant you know and
that's that's a Trope from every bloody
horror movie you can possibly imagine
you know the the itinerant serial killer
for example well why do you have to be
itinerate well it's because if you live
in a closed community and you screw
people
over then your reputation gets around
like instantly and people are
unbelievably good at tracking cheating
like there's there's some evidence we
have an evolved module for remembering
cheaters like it's a major deal you have
to go exactly exactly you have to go
find new
victims okay so and so you and you do
that you essentially do that by hiding
you camouflage yourself right as as a
new person okay so now you might say
well we've invented a new world it's a
virtual
world well the thing I think
virtualization enables the Psychopaths
because you can't do reputation tracking
yeah and God only knows how dangerous
that is it's happening online of course
it's happening even in in in the real
world uh you know I know we touched on
this in our in the last time you and I
spoke on your show about dating apps but
one of the things that those things
allow for and you know it's it's an
online platform but it allows people to
meet in real life is that now dark Triad
types dark tetrad types are able to
essentially have multiple partners in
non-overlapping Social Circles uh so in
the past if you wanted to sleep around
word would get out and you'd develop a
reputation as a scoundrel or a
philanderer or so on whereas now you can
have multiple different partners who
don't know one another who aren't a
member of your Social Circle they are
not members of one another's Social
Circles and none of them are aware of
what's going on and this allows
Psychopathic types to indulge their
appetites with no penalties no
reputational penalties probably also
generates it even worse right because
well because you could imagine imagine
the borderline cases so and those would
even be young men to some degree because
they're tilted more in the narcissistic
and Psychopathic Direction and that
would also be a consequence of um
incomplete cortical
maturation now
the problem with the problem with the uh
what would you say consequence-free
dating is that there's no price to be
paid for your flery and now so then the
question is what do you become if you
practice predatory sexuality and the
answer is well clearly you become you
tilt yourself in the psychopathic
Direction because what you're doing
technically is deriving immediate
gratification with no reputational or
practical responsibility and the people
who are advertising for Hedonism see I
just watched Cabaret have you watched
the movie Cabaret I haven't seen it okay
I would highly recommend it it's about
the wear Republic in Germany and it's
about a
cabaret it's about a young woman who's a
cluster be type Who Wants to Be an an
movie actress who's running down the
hedonistic Road at a cabaret and she's
quite promiscuous and
and diluted and clueless and she has her
little codery of followers and she
performs at a cabar and like many
cluster B people especially the
histrionic types she's she's got a
certain degree of artistic talent and
that goes along with that fluidity of
identity you know because artists are
shape Changers obviously and so um
anyways the movie tracks her descent
along with people she more or less pulls
along with her
but what's very interesting about it is
that the director does a brilliant job
of this is that the Nazis are in the
background constantly right so there's
this immense tension between this
Hedonism this unbridled hedonistic
short-term lifestyle that's
hypothetically free and and uh
enlightened like the luxury belief types
and the Nazis who are waiting in the
wing and I've been trying to puzzle this
out conceptually so imagine that a large
proportion of the population devolves
towards impulsive
sensuality okay it's a responsibilist
mode of being okay but as your book
indicates Things Fall
Apart because of that well when Things
Fall Apart there's an unconscious clamor
for the Tyrant right so you so you get
this you get this Hedonism T tyranny
Dynamic now you see the same thing in
the movie Pinocchio you remember in
Pinocchio the the delinquent boys go to
Pleasure Island right but underneath are
the slavers who turn them into braining
jackasses it's the same and that movie
was put out by the way just be just
before the second world war right so
they had their finger on the pulse but
so there's there's this there's this
insistence in classic stories
that Hedonism and tyranny go go hand in
hand right it's bread in circuses to
some degree in the Roman emperors right
but it's deeper than that it's that if
the entire population insists upon
maintaining immaturity and the
hedonistic gratification that goes along
with that there will inevitably be a
corresponding demand from the
unconscious to elevate the figure of the
of the missing authority figure right
the missing author to maintain order I
read this uh this study this I think
he's a Danish psychologist Michael bang
Peterson and some of his co-authors
where they there was the study was on on
populism and what he found was that um
it was it was a study on populism on
status they had a variety of different
measures but one of the things he the
study concluded they they they had
measures of the need for social status
the desire for dominance the uh the
proclivity to be interested in populism
and he found this inverse correlation
between the dry for status and the
interest in populism and what he
basically concluded him and his
co-authors was that people who support
populism they themselves aren't actually
that interested in status what they want
is a strong leader they are not
interested in ascending to those High
positions in society they would rather
just elect a strong man to implement
their preferences while they can go
about their business and live their
lives and they're not that interested in
getting involved in influential
political and cultural roles whereas um
people who are very opposed to populism
uh have a strong desire for status and
they don't like the idea of a strong man
they themselves want to be the
influental leader or the person who gets
to call the shots and they don't like
the idea of the strong man and I'm
thinking about what you're describing
that the kinds of people who are tilting
more and more towards populism they are
looking at their lives and they're not
seeing their preferences and values
reflected in the communities around them
of families deteriorating and Community
suffering and people out of work and
jobless and addicted to drugs and so on
and maybe they themselves aren't
interested in a political career but if
they hear someone say how they're going
to fix things and clean things up
they'll vote for that person uh
meanwhile the upper segment of society
who when they look around they see an
environment of relative order and
cleanliness and people who are doing
well for themselves and highly educated
and well off um they don't see the need
for a strong man leader and many of the
people who are in those sort of gated in
safe areas they themselves are
interested in influential positions in
society and they're the on want to run
things okay so you'd have to
differentiate that further a because
then you could differentiate the the
populist admirers into two camps there'd
be those that are looking
to those who are generally concerned
with the emergence of disorder and who
don't know what to do about
it and then there'd be those who want to
abdicate all responsibility for
self-governance to a centralized
Authority H interesting right right
exactly now on the wealthy side you'd
have the same kind of division you'd
have the people who genuinely want to
take responsibility for the political
and those who are opposed to populists
because that's competition for their
Psychopathic power seeking yes yes that
sounds right yeah so there's a sort of a
benevolent in midle lent side of both of
those both yes exactly well you know I
haven't seen any psychological research
pertaining to the relationship between
impulsive Hedonism
and and admiration for more
authoritarian beliefs H I haven't seen
very interesting to see that tested no
I've seen nothing I've seen nothing like
that right because and and that's well
there's lots of things that
psychologists do a very bad job of
studying and certainly leftwing
authoritarianism is like very high up
there on the list and so the other thing
I was curious about something you said
earlier you know that I've really been
struck in recent years by the
willingness of the left in particular
and these are the the leftists who I
think are part of the camp that you
described as the elitists who want it
all right they're very willing to
sacrifice the poor to their hypothetical
ideals right and so I've also seen no
research at all like I'm very curious to
know if
the what the what the cloud of meaning
around these so-called luxury beliefs
might be you know because one of the
things I've really seen happen in Europe
it's really an appalling thing to watch
is that the very people who once so
these people people on the left who once
were in hypothetically on the side of
the economically oppressed are
absolutely 100% willing to implement
policies that will demolish the poor in
the service of their utopian and
self-aggrandizing beliefs you know and
you you pointed out some mechanisms
there it's like well what does it cost a
an elite young woman who's at Yale and
who's highly likely let's say she's
above average in attractiveness you know
she's bright she comes from a family
that's doing well she's intelligent
she's going to get
married it costs her nothing to
claim that her compassion is so
overwhelming that she's willing to
accept anyone's disgraceful behavior in
principle it costs her absolutely
nothing the price is definitely paid by
the truly poor and it does happen from
the bottom up right and you know why
because the farther down you go in a
hierarchy of status and reputation The
more stress there is yes and so if you
increase the amount of chaos you knock
off the bottom people and that that does
account for that Cascade that you
described earlier is that fatherlessness
emerged first in the black community and
then spread very very widely and then
exactly the same thing started to happen
in the Hispanic Community from the
bottom of the economic uh hierarchy
upward then it started to happen in the
Caucasian population but it's but the
end
point the endpoint appears if you just
map out the trends the endpoint appears
that there will be fewer and fewer
people in in stable relationships I mean
that's that's it's it's happening at an
incredibly but the people that are in
those relationships they pay no price
whatsoever for expanding their tolerance
to include all forms of of behavior that
actually work to undermine that
necessary stability and they won't even
admit that this it's like they just
called that that's just called well
that's your arbitrary moral judgment all
families are equal and that's another
place where you undoubtedly got in
trouble with your book so maybe we could
close with this because one of the
things you do that's quite striking in
your book is and I think this is where
we'll take the conversation for everyone
watching and listening I think this is
where we'll continue the conversation on
The Daily wire side
you are a poster boy so to speak for the
utility of pursuing higher education
you've had quite marked success partly
because you did you had skills and
abilities that weren't EX usted by the
situations that you found yourself in
even within the military and you got
access to higher education and you're
you have likely you have a pretty decent
academic future ahead of you by the
looks of things but you make the case
very clearly that as far as you're
concerned and from what you've observed
that education is no substitute for
stability of
family so why don't you talk about that
for a bit and then and then we'll and
then we'll bring this to a to a close
well we have this preoccupation
with so so there's this question of how
to achieve more upward social Mobility
for kids in deprived and dysfunctional
circumstances and for the last few
decades it's it's we've been focusing on
education and in college as the end all
and Beall that if we could just get more
kids to get more degrees and earn higher
income comes and join the middle class
that that that's the mark of a
successful society and I make the claim
as someone who has done pretty well
educationally but had you
know the very
tumultuous experiences with different
families um that actually I think the
family piece is more important than the
education piece and even if we wanted
more kids to go to college and to obtain
deg degrees we would we would be more
effective in achieving that goal if we
looked at what happens before the age of
18 then what happens after if we looked
at what's happening in Children's Home
lives and their family lives um so
that's one part of it I mean if you look
at the predictors of going to college
one of them is having two parents at
home that's one of the strongest
predictors of going on to obtain a
bachelor's degree uh and so even if the
goal was bachelor's degree is fine but
let's look at how to promote stable two
parent homes the other piece is you know
when I think back to the guys I grew up
with and the community I lived in
and I had five close friends growing up
two of them went to prison I had one
friend who was shot
and college may not have been the right
path for those guys College isn't the
right path for everyone um but I do
think so so maybe regardless of
environment wherever you put these guys
um I'm not entirely convinced that they
would have gone on to achieve astounding
educational success but I do think that
if they had been in an environment where
there was more family stability good
Role Models adults putting the needs of
children before their own desires they
wouldn't have been incarcerated they
wouldn't have gone to you know they
wouldn't have been shot to death so we
may not be able to do much to raise the
ceiling for a lot of kids but I think we
could do more to raise the floor as far
as how catastrophically down they could
become versus we've been focusing on the
other side of it which is how much more
can we lift them up you know you're
probably well aware uh I've heard you
you know I know I know you're aware of
the the research on the limitations of
increasing intelligence and academic
ability and those kinds of things there
are hard limits to that um but I don't
think we've done enough to look at the
other side of you know we can actually
prevent young boys especially
from incarceration from being locked up
one of the
statistics I cite in the book is that
only 3% of children in foster care
graduate from college whereas 60% of
boys in foster care are later
incarcerated and I I mean I don't know
if we can do a I mean we could probably
do more to get more kids uh from those
backgrounds into universities but we
should also be focusing on how to
prevent those kids from living in such
dysfunctional and deprived circumstances
in the first place that lead them to uh
jail and prison
and ultimately the book is a kind of
implicit defense of family from an
author who really didn't have one uh and
that we could be expanding our area of
concern Beyond just the educational um
I'm grateful to have achieved the
success that I have and it's better than
not having those things um but towards
the end of the book I I do say that um
you know when I think back to the good
memories I had for my upbringing um
yeah I I would trade all of it I would
trade all of the educational credentials
and accolades and so on to have just had
a more sort of stable normal
conventional upbringing um yep y yeah
and I think we'll delve into that a bit
more okay well thank you very much and
and for all of you watching and
listening that troubl is a very
interesting book and I think it it gets
the meta story right um we've wrestled
with this issue for example at this
Alliance for responsible citizenship
that I've been building with some other
people and one of the more contentious
streams of discussion we've had was with
regard to family policy and we settled
on the agreement hardfought that the
nuclear family is the minimal ideal that
can sustain Society it it might not be
sufficient even there's a lot of stress
on nuclear families it might not be
enough but once you fragment below
nuclear family you're you're playing
with you're playing with fire you're
playing with serious fire you know and
there's a dark side too to that another
Dark Side to that um luxury belief thing
you know it's
like you might want think that people
want wealth for comfort and opportunity
but they also want wealth for
comparative
status and it's it's very much
advantageous for the psychopathic
wealthy to ensure that the fragmented
masses are so chaotic that they don't
get to have what the rich
have right because a lot of status is
having something that someone else
doesn't have it's not the same as wealth
right and so real psychopath types well
you know there is literature showing a
relationship between the dark tetrad and
so imagine this is you could imagine a
situation where you here's the deal you
can have your salary doubled but your
friends have their cies
tripled right right or you can you can
and you can contrast that against
relative deprivation conditions where
your relative status is elevated at the
cost of other people's well-being well
the psychopathic narcissist types will
pick the elevation of relative status at
the cost of other people and I think
that's why they spend so much time
looking upward right like I I think that
there's a it's very interesting that uh
Eat the Rich is a more popular slogan
than feed the poor right yeah yes
because it is about that relative and
the people who say Eat the Rich tend to
be people who maybe they're not in the
1% but they're in the top 10% you the
people who are the most Dent
about oppressor oppressed dichotomies
and so on they're not the people at the
bottom they are people who are just just
below the top yeah yeah yeah well and
they and it's eat the rich is a lie it's
eat the competent that's really what
they mean yeah yeah and that's that's
the real man that's the real raing Cry
of the of the real narcissistic
psychopath it's like Devour the
competent and and you know when you say
if I say to someone who's competent you
just got everything you have by stealing
it that means it's perfectly not only is
legitimate for me to steal it if I'm
oppressed it's actually morally
obligatory for me to steal it right
that's a very dangerous situation that's
exactly what was set up in the early
Soviet Union exactly that and it
Psychopaths came out of the woodwork man
and they just turned that whole society
into hell yeah yeah same thing in MA
China and in uh Cambodian genocide yeah
I mean if you want like I mean the you
know this kind of ve off talk but the
the the Cambodian genocide is
fascinating because they basically
speedran communism and compressed all
the horrors of the Soviet Union into
about three years and they killed a
third of the country's population um
horrifying I mean yeah it's it's absurd
that we don't have more education around
what happened in communist societies but
that's yeah on aside it it it is it is
quite it is quite the stunning Miracle
of stupidity that's for sure all right
sir well thank you to everyone watching
and listening at this discussion today
I'm going to continue to talk to Rob on
The Daily wire side um I think we'll
delve into slightly more personal
matters on that side because I'm I'm
curious to find out well I'm curious to
talk a little bit more about research
hypothesis um since I don't have the
opportunity to do that much now that I'm
no longer working for a university
but I'm also curious
about finding out a little bit more
about what you think the lasting effects
for you have been as a consequence of
being raised in an environment where
relationships long-term relationships
were tenuous to say the least so let so
that's what we're going to do on the on
the on daily wire side so you guys are
welcome to join us for that and thank
you very much Rob it's a pleasure
talking to you I'm glad to hear that
despite the fact that you don't get to
do a book tour that at least not to
bookstores that your book is doing well
and I think it'll continue to do well so
and hopefully this podcast will help to
some degree for that and uh everybody
watching listening thank you very much
for your time and attention and to the
Daily wire plus people for making this
possible that's also much appreciated
good to talk to you thank you Dr
Peterson it's a
[Music]
pleasure